>> Joar: Good afternoon everyone,
and welcome to this session on State
of the Art Cocoa, user interface development.
My name is Joar Wingfors, and I'll be giving this
session together with my colleague Ron Lue-Sang.
And I also want to get a quick shout out to
Scott Stevenson of Apple who has helped us
to prepare these slides and the sample code.
The Mac platform has always been defined, at least in part
by its attention to usability and user interface design.
And as a result we have a lot of fantastic
applications on this platform for,
from Apple and from View, [phonetic]
our third party developers.
For many of these applications the user experience is
one of the most, one of the most important features
that these applications are recognized
by or, or compete with.
And Apple provides a rich set of tools and technologies
that helps us write these fantastic graphical applications.
But if you're new to the platform, or if you're new to user
interface development in general, it can be a bit difficult
to know where to get started, and
that's what this session is all about.
I also want to mention that this session we are going
to expect that you have a certain level of familiarity
with Xcode, Objective-C, and Interface Builder,
and not go in too much of detail on those topics.
So Ron and I will take you on this journey
through the world of Cocoa UI development.
And while we won't be able to cover all of
it, we hope to cover enough that by the end
of this session you know enough to
be able to get around on your own.
And on this journey we're going to make 4 stops.
I'm going to start out by talk about how
to get started using Interface Builder.
On the second stop I will talk about the
fundamentals of using Cocoa for drawing.
After that Ron will come on stage and
talk about how to create custom controls
and how to integrate your custom
controls in the Cocoa UI libraries.
And last, Ron will talk a bit about how to use behaviors
and animations to make your user interfaces come alive.
So while this session will be mostly be about the more
hands on part of creating, or viewing UI development,
the successful outcome of that, of those efforts will,
to a large degree, be determined by a lot of things
that have come before you actually
end up in your implementation phase.
And to, to achieve really outstanding results, like
the examples on the, one of the earlier slides,
you need to allow for your UI designers to affect
both the requirements and all of the input parameters
for your project, as well as the output
parameters of your projects, the vision and the,
and the, and the look and the functionality.
You need to have, allow your user interface designers
to play like, play, have an equal part to say
as your software designers for that final result.
Apple provides a set of human interface guidelines
that can support and guide your UI development efforts.
But it's important to note that these are not a set of
rules, these are a set of guidelines, and should not be,
and you shouldn't think of them as something that limits
the, the creativity of your UI designers on the Mac.
So when you do user interface developments
on the Mac you have two things to help you.
You have the Cocoa UL libraries on the
one hand, and you have Interface Builder,
our visual design tool, tool on the other.
From time to time I hear developers who
are new to our platform they ask about how
to sidestep Interface Builder entirely and how
to build all of your user interfaces in code.
And while this is certainly absolutely
possible, and you know,
to some extent it could be an interesting intellectual
exercise and learning experience possibly, we here at Apple,
and Mac developers in general, we don't do this.
Instead we're relying on user Interface Builder.
And why do we do that?
You've probably heard the saying that
a good developer is a lazy developer.
And what we mean by that is that good developers know that
the code that you don't have to write for yourself is code
that you don't have to debug or
maintain, probably for years to come.
And this is where Interface Builder really excels.
If you use Interface Builder to create the, the
bulk of your UI, all of the parts that make sense,
you end up being so very much more productive in the end.
So let's say we have a company and we've set up
to, set up to create a light table application
And the light table is an application allows,
that allows users to drag in photos and images,
and arrange them together to see how they work out.
We have arrived at a point where
we have some design documents
and art resources, and, and where do we go from there?
So what I was, would do is that it would start out by trying
to identify the major components of, of the application,
or in this case the application main window.
So over here on the far left we
have what we call a source list.
And the source list lists all of the projects that
the user has created in our light table application.
You can see that for the project we have
a nice, a nice thumbnail, and a title,
and a count for the number of images in the project.
Beneath the source list we have a utility
bar that groups a number of controls.
Over here it's the light table itself,
the main canvas of our application.
And finally there is a split view that
divides the source list from the light table.
[ silence ]
>> Joar: In addition to being allowed to reposition
and resize the photos on the canvas, the users,
our design document also calls for
allowing the users to flip over the photos
and configure some display characteristics for the
photos by using a special set of controls in the back.
And you can, and you might notice that just like with some
of the other controls in this, and some of the other UI
in this application, the controls have a bit of a
custom theme here on the backside of our photos.
So now that we have a basic understanding of the
functionality and the UI for our, our application,
lets jump into our first demo and look a bit at how
you would bring this up using Interface Builder,
and just how far we could get using Interface,
Interface Builder in standard controls.
[ silence ]
>> Joar: So just like in a good cooking show
I've cheated a bit here, and but I'm started.
I created a simple Cocoa application with a single window
controller, and I've spent a couple of minutes just dragging
in standard controls from the Interface Builder
library to create the basic shape of the window.
You can see that it is recognizable.
And if I run this application just from IB I have some
buttons down here, I have my slider, split view works.
Not everything is working perfectly.
For example, you know this background
behind this slider shouldn't be clickable.
I sort of tried to make something that looked like a
utility bar by putting gradient button behind here,
but that isn't really working out perfectly.
If I were to spend just a little bit
more time using Interface Builder
[ silence ]
>> Joar: This is still just using the standard stuff
from Interface Builder I, I could get this far.
I, I have the basic shape of the window up.
I've cheated a bit and I've added
this very simple custom view
to draw the background of, of the
light table, but that's about it.
You have the source list appearance
with the special selection colors.
I even have some basic data from my application provided
by data bindings that I can set up in Interface Builder.
But it's clear that we still have some ways to go.
I don't have the, sort of the darker
theme that we wanted for the glass bar,
the utility bar at the bottom of the source list.
We don't have all of the photos,
because the photos would have
to be created problematically, so I can't set them up in IB.
So all of that would have to be added
by customizations in our application.
And Ron will pick up where I left off, where I left off
this demo application, and make all of those customizations
to make this demo app reach the final design
that we saw from our design documents.
[ silence ]
>> Joar: But before Ron does that I'm going to switch
back to slides and talk to you a little bit about the,
talk to you about Cocoa and Mac OS X as a drawing
platform, so that you have the understanding
of the drawing technologies that we
need to create these custom controls.
This will be a, a overview of the technologies that Cocoa
provides for a drawing, but it will be reasonably complete.
And I am going to try to focus in on some
specific concepts that we use in Cocoa for drawing
to make sure that we cover them in a good way.
Now everything that we see on screen lives in a window.
The tic tac toe game up here, you know,
that application window is clearly a window,
but so is the menu bar, the dock,
and even the desktop picture
Similarly, everything that you see in your application
windows, your buttons, your text fields, your scrollers,
all of that is of a type of object called views.
Views provide event handling and drawing for a
particular rectangular area inside of the window.
In this case we have the background view here that
draws the checkered background for this, for this game.
You can add subviews to views.
And subviews added to a superview, they assume some of
those responsibilities, the drawing and event handling
for the area that they cover in their
superview, the game piece in this example.
In this day, in this way views are arranged to
perform a single view hierarchy inside of the window.
[ silence ]
>> Joar: In order for views to do their drawing
and event handling, they need to be able to refer
to the casians [phonetic] inside of their canvas,
to do that they need to have a coordinate system.
And the coordinate system for views are, have their origin
in the lower left corner of the view, like in this example.
Some views have what is called a flip coordinate system,
where the origin of the coordinate
systems in the top left corner.
And we do that when the contents of the view
naturally flows from the top left corner and down.
That makes it easier to lay out the contents.
An, an example of that would be for
views that manages to lay out a text.
The position and size of a subview inside
of its superview is called the frame
The data type for the frame is a simple C structure called
NSRect, which is in turn composed by an NSPoint C structure
that contains the X and Y positions,
and an NSSize C structure
that contains the widths and the height of the subview.
[ silence ]
>> Joar: And to complete this picture just like
the superview had an internal coordinate system,
so does all of the subviews in turn, of course.
[ silence ]
>> Joar: So while Cocoa is an object oriented
framework, not everything in Cocoa is an object.
The data types and functions used to, to work with and
describe the geometry for views is an example of that.
There, there are a number of convenience,
convenient that you can use to work these data types.
And they might be somewhat easy to overlook
in the documentation, but you should make sure
to familiarize yourself with these functions,
because they make it much, much less error prone
and much more convenient to work with these data types.
And among those functions there
are also a number of functions
that provide basic drawing; I'm
going to call out two of those.
NSFrameRect and NSRectFill, they both take an NSRect
parameter and they either, they either outline the shape
of that Rect or fill that Rect
with a single color respectively.
Moving on to the object oriented parts of the API,
starting out with gradient, paths, images, and text.
NSGradient is a relatively new addition to the Cocoa APIs.
You can create linear gradients or radial gradients
using two, as in this case, or more color stops.
NSBezierPath provides for the supports
creating simple or, or very complex shapes.
And we describe these shapes, or we create these
shapes using path segments that can be either straight,
as in these, as in this example, or curved.
And besides allowing you to describe your, your
shapes or objects, NSBezierPath also supports drawing.
And you can use the path class to both stroke the
outline of a path or to fill it with single colors.
What is more interesting though is that BezierPath supports
flipping other drawing operations, or masking them.
If I were to use this star-shaped
path as a clip path, and then draw a,
a standard rectangular image, I would
end up with something like this.
And this is a very useful capability that you
should all think about; we use it all the time.
Images in turn, you can create images from files or
from data in your application, and besides the obvious,
the ability to draw an image to a window where the window
is the, the drawing destination, you can also use images
as drawing destinations on their own, where subsequent
drawing operations get rendered into that image.
NSImage provides API for loading images, and
drawing images, and other, and other things too.
But they don't actually handle the image data themselves.
When an image is asked to load some image data, it
turns around and creates an instance of NSImageRep.
The particular subclass of ImageRep created depends on
the type of image data that you ask NSImage to load.
If you were to ask NSImage to load a PNG or
JPEG file, some type of bitmap image format,
NSImage would create an NSBitmapImageRep internally.
Similarly if you were to try to load a
PDF image it would create an NSPFImageRep.
When you do custom drawing for a view,
you can take this to 1 of 2 approaches.
You could either use all of the technologies that I'm
outlining now using colors, and paths, and gradients,
and you can do all of the drawing problematically
at one time, or you could have your designers do all
of that hard work for you and supply you with
images that you ship with your application
that you load at one time and, and draw at one time.
I guess you could do a bit of both as well, right?
But two approaches.
If you have something like the button that we have on
this screen here where the button, button needs to be able
to resize horizontally, for example it will fit, you
know, the contents of the button, like the title.
This requirement doesn't preclude
you from using prerendered images.
You can slice up your images, and if you were to use
the 3 and 9 part drawing functions that Cocoa provides,
it's very easy to then, at one time draw
these images at the appropriate width.
Using these functions take away a lot of
the positioning problems and sizing problems
that would otherwise be involved by trying to
draw something like this by doing it manually.
It's very easy to draw simple strings of text
in Cocoa using the attributed string class.
NSAttributedString provides you with control over
all of the properties that you would typically
like to manipulate or control when drawing text.
You can set the font to use, you can set the
alignment of the text, you can even specify the type
of truncation markers to automatically get inserted in your
text when the text is too wide to fit the allotted space.
NSAttributedString also provides you with a
measurement, with the measurements that you need on,
of your string in order to be able to position it before
you draw it, so the width and the height of the string.
Moving on to colors and shadows, and the
reason that I separated out these two object,
objects is that they work rather different,
differently from the previous four.
And I want to talk a bit extra about those why them,
why they work differently and how they work differently.
Here I create a red color by specify the red, green,
and blue components, and the opacity for the color.
But unlike the earlier examples we don't draw colors
directly, and neither do we typically pass colors
as parameters that are drawing functions, instead,
instead we sect the colors in a shared context.
I'll get back to this shared context in a minute.
This is how you would create a shadow
by specifying the color of the shadow
and the offset from the object casting the shadow.
And just like for colors we don't draw the shadows
ourselves or explicitly, instead we, again we set the shadow
and its shared context where it
affects subsequent drawing operations.
Even something as complex as this text
drawing here would get the shadow applied.
So the shape context is represented in
Cocoa by the NSGraphicsContext class.
And the graphics context is a fundamental part of the
drawing infrastructure, not only in Cocoa, but on Mac OS X.
The graphics context describes the drawing
destination; it could be the window,
or the bitmap image that you are drawing to.
But it also provides a multitude of
configuration options that affect your drawing.
We already talked about the colors and
the shadows that are set in the context.
The example of using a NSBezierPath to
clip your drawing, that functionality,
is also supported by the clipping radiant
support provided by the graphics context.
In addition to those examples there are font
attributes, and path attributes, and the list goes on.
Since this is a shared context, like a global thing,
NSGraphicsContext provide for a push and pop model
to scope your local configuration changes.
You access this push and pop model by using the save
and restore methods available on the graphics context.
Note though that for the most part when you provide, when
you do your custom drawing in Cocoa in a subclass of NSView
or something like that, for the most part you don't have to
manage the context yourself; you don't have to create it,
you don't have to customize it for the most part, you
don't have to, for the most part, call, save, and restore.
All of that is done for you.
If you need, if you need to do those things you can,
but for many simple cases you wouldn't even have to.
Now that you know a bit more about how to do drawings,
we need to think a little bit about
when it is appropriate to draw.
The first half of the answer to that question
is easy, we need to, we need to draw whenever,
whenever state that affects our visual appearance changes.
But the, there is a catch here.
And that is that when the state of our application changes
oftentimes many views would be updated at the same time.
And not, not only many, many views,
but also many properties per view.
And there are, it is for many reason
inefficient and undesirable to try to push all
of those individual display updates to screen individually
as soon as you get the, the, the, the change in the state.
So to take care of that Cocoa provides
a drawing model that is coalesced.
Where all of these drawing updates
are done at the same time.
So this is the basic, the basic sequence
of events for how this takes place.
So your view is handling some event
that changes its state in a way
that that affects the visual appearance of the view.
At this point the view will flag
itself as needing redisplay.
Sometime later, typically at the end of the event
loop, Cocoa will call back to the view all of,
all of the views that have marked themselves with
needing redisplay, and ask the views to draw.
The guides that are provided on NSView to
support this is setNeedsDisplay and drawRect.
Again, if you're only using standard
controls and standard properties
in these controls you don't have to do this for yourself.
If you have a standard NS button and change
the title, the button will mark itself
as needing redisplayed, so it happens automatically.
But if you create a subclass of NSView or one of
the controls, and if you add additional properties
that affects your visual appearance, you're
on the hook for calling setNeedsDisplay
when the state of those properties changes.
drawRect, so, setNeedsDisplay is something
that you need to call at the appropriate time,
drawRect on the other hand is a call back method that
you provide an implementation for in your subclass,
and that Cocoa calls, but that
you never have to call directly.
Remember this part of our design document.
Take a closer look at this custom button
here on the back of one of our photo tiles.
For my second demo I'm going to take a look at how
we provided the custom drawing for this button.
And in the interest of saving on time I'm not going to
show you the code for this, but the code is about yea big,
it's less than a page, and it's done all using the
techniques about, talked about earlier in this session.
So whenever I start to do some kind of new custom
control, the first thing that I would typically do is
that I would throw in a call to NSFrameRect and
ask it to draw just a red border on my view.
And this is for just an early and quick and dirty
standard to check to make sure that, you know,
I have the view set up, it, it's roughly, you
know, in the UI where it's expected to be.
It's sort of similar to printer-style
debugging and code, right?
And it's also somewhat useful troubleshooting
and debugging functionality
for its system custom controls, if
you want to see what, what's wrong.
The first thing I would do for when
creating this button is to create a path
that describes the rounded rectangular
outline of the button.
And I, then I would set this path to be a clipping
path for all of my subsequent drawing operations.
You can't see me doing that, but as soon
as I draw the first gradient background
of the button you can see the clipping path taking effect.
So when I, when I draw my gradient, this
dark to darker gradient for my background,
this is, I'm drawing into your rectangular area.
But since I'm using the clipping path I get
this now, nice rounded rectangular outline.
And there's a very convenient method NSBezierPath
for creating these rounded rectangular paths
My second drawing path is to draw the
highlight sheen on the top half of the button.
And I'm drawing that using a second
gradient that is much lighter.
Now that I have all of, all of the background for
my button I can draw the border around the button.
And that'll be very easy, since I already
have a path for the outline of the button.
And I can reuse the same path that I'm using to clip
drawings to, to, to, and stroke that path to try the border.
So the final thing I need to do here is just to
create an attributed string and to draw the text.
And while the text here, the title says done, I'm not quite
done yet, seeing the design calls for adding a shadow.
So I add the call to creating the shadow and here we are.
So while this, while this mostly looks like the button
that we have in our design, since I just created this
as a standard NSView subclass it doesn't
actually have any of the behavior
that we would expect from buttons, from a button.
I can't click it.
It also doesn't have any of the important accessibility
properties that a button subclass would have.
A blind user couldn't interact with this, because
this new subclass doesn't expose a title property
that they could interact with.
So in order for you to learn more about how to integrate
your custom drawing into Cocoa, and to do, actually,
talk more about how to creating custom controls
I'm going to ask Ron to come onstage and take over.
Thank you.
>> Ron: Hello everyone, my name is Ron
Lue-Sang, and I'm going to talk a little bit
about how we can create custom controls
that will fit the design of our application.
And then go on to talking about adding custom behaviors,
and even a little animation to really breathe life
into the application and make it fun for our users to use.
Now the place where I want to start out
is actually where Joar finished off,
which is with a basic skeleton application.
A good prototype with all the pieces mostly
laid out, but not completely functional yet.
Now there are a few things that are left.
We have to actually implement this canvas
where the user can draw, drag photos into.
There's the source list area where you can pick projects.
And then there's the utility bar at the bottom.
Those still have to be finished, even
though we have pieces stubbed out.
Now this is just a basic process that we
use in order to get from start to finish.
And it's all about making these controls and making
sure that they fit the design that we started out with.
That's really the focus here, is having a
process for making our controls fit our design.
Now we've already broken down the pieces.
I want to focus first on the utility
bar that we have at the bottom.
You know, what approach should we
take for making that utility bar real?
Well we, we saw that if we were to take just a
gradient bar, a gradient button as our background
and slap some pieces on top, it doesn't' work quite right.
You know, if we were to just try to take a
gradient button and, and fake something in.
The same would be true if we were to try and snag a
segmented control, try and piece some parts in like that.
You're looking at the options that we have.
There's no built, prebuilt utility bar available in Cocoa.
Nothing we can just drag out of IB.
So our options really come down to
building our own, and that's fine.
All we have to do is take out the
placeholder pieces we have in our Nib
and replace them all with just one simple custom view.
And then in IB we can set the class
name for our custom view.
And that will ensure that when this Nib gets loaded
that custom view will be replaced by
an instance of our utility bar class.
So it makes it really easy to add our custom controls
to the Nib and not have to add any fiddly code.
Back to the actual implementation
of our utility bar class though,
the way I would approach this is to just use composition.
I mean Cocoa is an object oriented language framework.
And, you know, composition is a very
object oriented thing, approach.
We have just, you know, our segmented
our slider, a few buttons,
an image over on the far right,
and this gradient background.
We could implement this utility bar just by
subclassing NSView like Joar did for his custom button,
and implement drawRect to draw this
gradient background using NSGradient.
Use an NSImage to composite a little
grabber image area out on the right,
and then add a couple of subviews
for the buttons and the slider.
And using composition, just using this approach, we could
implement this utility bar in a pretty straightforward way.
The code here isn't really that interesting.
What I want to focus on is the approach
for making controls fit your design.
Start out with something that's
prebuilt and see if you can tweak it.
If, if there's not enough, if there isn't
anything you can do to tweak this control,
then certainly look at using delegate methods that might
be available on this control to customize it further.
And barring that, take a look at overriding some,
some existing methods on an existing control.
So it's really just a process of starting out with
something that's prebuilt, and customizing as you go.
And only if all that isn't sufficient,
take a look at making a new one.
And don't be afraid to make a new one, but don't
jump in too early assuming that you'll have
to go back up to subclassing NSView for everything.
So with this approach in mind let's take a look
at another control that we still have to work on.
We have our outline view, and it has some of the
right colors that we want, but it's still far away
from being finished, from being a real source list.
You know, for example, we want to
hide the disclosure triangle next
to that little project group in that first row.
We have to draw the custom image, and text, and photo
count all in one row in our, in our outline view.
And there are actually some selection rules
for making something a real source list.
For instance, that group at the top shouldn't be selectable.
And you're only supposed to be able to
select one thing at a time, no more, no less.
So there's a, a bunch of things we have left to do.
And we could get all of this done by
using OutlineView delegate methods.
So this is another one of those places where
after we've tweaked some setting in IB or in code,
we can use delegation to get a lot farther
customizing these existing controls.
An example here, something that's new in Snow Leopard
by the way, is being able to hid the expansion triangle
for a given row in the OutlineView
just using a delegate call back.
From there though we still have
some other things we need to do.
We haven't touched on the custom drawing in each of
these rows, like drawing the text and the icon together
and having custom editing rules, tooltip
placement, a lot of these things, it turns out,
aren't customizable directly from OutlineView.
But don't be disheartened, it's not
something that we, we now have to go back up
and subclass NSView and rebuild everything from scratch.
We wouldn't want to do that.
In order to, to get the rest of this work
done, I want to talk first about cells.
Now if we were to take a much simpler
control, stepping away from OutlineView,
take a very simple control, the text field.
NSTextField and the way it draws, if you were to
look at it, NSTextField is simply an NS control
that uses an NSTextField cell for all of its drawing.
TextField is just a control that uses a
TextFieldCell for all of its drawings.
But if you were to look at where
TextField and TextFieldCell are
in the class inheritance hierarchy,
it would be worlds apart.
Right? We'd start off at NSObject,
and below that we have NSResponder.
Now NSResponder is our base class for everything in
Cocoa that responds to user events, things like Windows,
actually Window Controller, the NS application
itself, and views, and from NSViews to send NSControl.
NSControl is the base class for everything that
we're used to manipulating in our application UI.
Things like, buttons, and sliders, and text fields.
So this is where TextField lives
in the class inheritance hierarchy.
That's two.
But if you were to look for NSCell it's all the way
out here on its own, just directly from NSObject.
It's a very lightweight class that's really just
interested in drawing and some user event handling support.
And I said that TextField's use
TextFieldCells for their drawing.
Well, every TextField has a very close
relationship with the TextFieldCell.
And that's because every control has a NSCell.
That's just the built in relationship.
All controls have a cell.
If we were to take a look at another control,
first remember now that NSControl is an NSView.
And most controls implement their
drawRect method from NSView.
We implement drawRect simply by forwarding
over to the control cell, telling the cell,
draw in frame in view, draw with frame in view.
And we pass the area of the control
that needs to be drawn using the cell,
and pass the control itself as
the view that's being drawn into.
And that's how the cell draws.
So the cell doesn't have to worry
itself about its place in the window.
It's the view that is placed in the window.
It's the view that has the hierarchy of, of subviews.
The cell is just about drawing.
And if we took a look at another
control, NSButton, it's the same story.
We have an NSButton control and an NSButton
cell, which is responsible for the drawing.
And there wouldn't be much sense to this
separation if it was always a 1 to 1 mapping.
And it's not the case.
It's not always 1 to 1.
We have other controls, like NSMatrix.
So here NSButton using an NSButton cell to do its drawing,
and NSMatrix using button cells to draw its content.
And remember it can, an NSMatrix can use an arbitrary
number of cells, and there's no one matrix cell,
it's just whatever cell it's handed to draw.
So it could be text, text field cells, button cells,
image cells, anything that's a cell the matrix can draw
and stamp out the contents of each cell area very cheaply.
So that's controls and cells, and their relationships.
And if we step away from matrix for
a moment and look at another control
that uses multiple cells we come back
to our old friend, NSOutlineView.
So for NSOutlineView, which is a control, it implements
its drawRect, basically, by drawing its bordered area
and its background, and then forwarding on for each
row of data that needs to be displayed to a data cell.
In this case here we have just simple text field cells.
So knowing that, we know that we can get the
rest of our work done showing those custom view,
those custom rows with images, and
text, and photo count information.
All that all in one row, by using the OutlineView delegate,
OutlineView table cell for table
column, data cell for table column item.
Using this delegate method to hand
back a custom cell that we'll interpose
in this, in each row, to do the custom drawing.
So just by using OutlineView Cell Delegation, we can
get a lot farther in, in implementing our designs.
I'm going to show a quick demo
here of what we ended up with.
[ silence ]
>> Ron: So just for reference, here we have the original
mock up, the original prototype that Joar had shown off.
[ silence ]
>> Ron: And with a bit of work and some custom controls
this is where we end up, something that looks just
like our user interface design pattern,
our, our user interface designs.
We can select our projects, and they flip between
the photos that are on, in those projects.
We have our canvas over here that we've gone ahead
and implemented, so we can add photos to them.
Click around and drag.
You'll notice that we also have our split view
set up so that we, we're using delegation here
to prevent the source list from getting too small.
We also have live previews in our source list.
So using our custom cell drawing, we redraw the, the,
the cell of the project that's been
updated, just by dragging around the photo.
[ silence ]
>> Ron: And we have our custom utility
bar with active little slider thing.
[ silence ]
>> Ron: So I don't have enough time, unfortunately,
to go into all of the details in the project itself,
I just wanted to show you that with a little bit
of code we can get pretty far using
custom controls to match our design.
So we're most of the way through our little journey.
We've touched on the basics of Cocoa drawing, and the
basic, the fundamentals of how to draw using Cocoa API's.
Looked at an approach of how to
create custom controls that will fit
with the design that we've been, that we've been using.
Now I want to touch on adding custom behaviors
to our application to really bring it to life,
including adding animation as feedback for our users.
[ silence ]
>> Ron: When I talk about behaviors
I'm really talking about responding
to user events, responding to what the user is doing.
And after talking about some of event-based API's, I
want to talk a little bit about supporting drag and drop,
which I think is an important thing
for every Mac application.
I don't know if you were able to see it during the demo.
If you saw when I moved the mouse
over our individual photos,
the icon for our cursor changes as
it enters and exits the photo area.
The way that works is, we have
a view hierarchy in that canvas.
And each photo has its own, is in its own view.
And those views, the view class that we used to hold the
photos implements the methods, mouseEntered and mouseExited
to adjust the, the, to show this
little info icon at the bottom right,
as well as to switch the cursor
for the, the icon for the cursor.
This is a good pair of methods to know about.
It's really easy to add some event-based feedback for
the user just by keying off of these two callbacks,
but you have to ask for these events
to be delivered to your view.
And the way you ask for them is usually by
implementing update tracking areas in your views.
Update tracking areas gets called whenever your
views, for example, when the view's bounds change.
The area of the view is no longer the same as it was before.
The area that's interesting for the
user is now smaller in this case.
Or if the contents, for example, we, we
wanted to show this little info button.
If the area that that info button is supposed to
show up in changes, we're given the opportunity
to update where the interesting rectangles are.
And the way we do that, inside of our
implementation of update tracking areas is just
to remove the old tracking areas that
we were watching before, the old frames,
and add new frames that we want to watch.
And we can say which, which events we
want to hear about for those frames.
So when we go to create new tracking areas
to add, using add, add up, add tracking area,
we make sure to add this option during creating the
tracking area, NSTracking, mouseEntered and exited.
By creating tracking areas with this option and
adding them, then our view will get the mouseEntered
and mouseExited callbacks that we were talking about, so we
can add that custom behavior, like showing extra adornments
to our view when the mouse enters or exits.
[ silence ]
>> Ron: There are a lot of other
events that the view can respond to.
These are all callbacks that we inherit from NSResponder.
Things like mouseDown, mouseUp, events that tell
us which of the mouse buttons was depressed,
mouseDragged events during the click and drag of the mouse.
I want to talk about two of these
specifically, mouseDown and mouseDragged.
[ silence ]
>> Ron: MouseDown events are pretty important.
You can imagine that we implemented our
canvas with the individual photo views
by implementing mouseDown inside of
our canvas or the photo views, right?
Whenever the user clicks within a
photo view, we want to be able to,
to show that information about the photo size underneath.
[ silence ]
>> Ron: And the same thing for the little info window.
Hypothetically when the user clicks
just in that little info I badge,
we want to be able to show some info about the photo.
Now the mouseDown method gets past an event.
And this is a user event.
This is an NS event that represents what
happened, what the user did at that moment
that melts down the path, got invoked on our view.
And you can find out things like, was
it a mouse event, was it a key event.
And for mouse events you can ask for where
was the mouse at the time the event happened?
And you get the location of the mouse in the entire window.
That's great, but usually you're interested in figuring
out where the mouse was in the view in the window.
You want it in view, in the views coordinate space.
And there's a simple way of getting that information
as well, taking the base location in the window
and using the method convertPoint:fromView:inPathNil.
And then you can convert the location from the window
into the views coordinate system and get an idea
of where these are clicked, whether they clicked on the
little I badge or just on the, the general photo itself.
[ silence ]
>> Ron: Now this is a really common method to implement,
if for no other reason than to keep track of what was
under the mouse at the time that the click happened, so that
then you can go and implement this method, mouseDragged.
Pretty common thing is to start off
mouseDragged by looking at, well,
what was under the mouse at the
time that mouseDown happened.
This gives you a good clue of, in
our example, in our application,
figuring out which photo the user is trying to drag.
[ silence ]
>> Ron: From there I want to talk
briefly about drag and drop.
You saw that I could drag photos from the desktop
into our canvas to add them to our project.
Don't be fooled though.
Just because I was talking about mouseDragged
events, handling mouseDragged events,
that doesn't mean that we've implemented drag and drop.
Those mouse events are about the
location of the mouse within the window.
Those, those are callbacks about the
mouse moving around within your view.
Drag and drop is a data exchange
operation, from one view to another,
or from a window to another view,
from another application to your view.
It's data exchange in the same way that cut,
copy, and paste from another application
to your app is a data exchange operation.
In order to support that in our
application we simply use a pair of methods.
Our canvas is registered as a drop target.
We do this by calling registerForDraggedTypes in our canvas.
It registers itself as accepting certain
data types for drag and drop operations.
This sort of thing is usually called really early, like
in awake from Nib, or from init, inside of our canvas.
Definitely before the user has any opportunity
to start dragging something into the view.
Once the view is registered for these dragged types, there
will be some conversation between the view and the drag
and drop machinery, asking is it
OK to drop this piece of data?
Is it OK to put it here?
There's a certain dialog that goes on, and it culminates
in asking our, our view to perform this drag operation.
And that's really where the view is meant to pull the data
from the drag and drop machinery and add it to the view.
PerformDragOperation, passes a dragging info object
that has info like, what was the source of this drag?
Where was this coming from?
Information like where was the mouse at
the time that the drag operation concluded?
And the draggingPasteboard, which will be where the data for
the drag and drop operation current, was put by the source.
Again, this is like cut, copy, and paste, where the
contents of cut or copy gets put onto a pasteboard.
And now our receiving view is able to
pull that data off of the pasteboard.
[ silence ]
>> Ron: So those are a few important topics, event handling
in general, and supporting drag and drop as a, as a concept.
I want to talk now about adding
animations for our application.
And for an application like this,
especially something that handles photos,
well you can see here it'd be pretty easy to, as a user,
drag in a ton of photos and then
end up with just a big jumble.
It'd be nice if we could clean this up for the user.
So we could do that by taking all the views
and moving them into some cleaned up place.
That would work, but it would be nice if we could
do this with a nice transition, a nice animation,
to give the user some context, so
that they know what's going on.
They can see what's happening better.
Animation is just a great way of giving
the user the feeling that you care.
Now before I talk about exactly how we go ahead
and implement animations in our application,
I want to cover one thing, how we draw with views normally.
When I say normally I'm talking about all of the, the
drawing topics that we've covered so far in the talk.
This is the way that views draw.
They have one shared buffer that's
owned by the window that they're in.
And all of the views live in a stack;
they're ordered in Z-order close,
the closer to the user, the higher the, the Z-order number.
And the bottommost views draw first.
And they just draw one after another, drawing on
top of each other into the same shared buffer.
So they overwrite each other's pixels.
[ silence ]
>> Ron: This is bad, because, well, if you were
to reorder any of these views you have to go
and redraw the overlapping areas so that
you get the new overlapping contents.
Order matters in the drawing.
So reordering means you have to
redraw the overlapping areas.
And the same is true if you were to
change the contents of any of these views.
You'd have to go back and redraw
the overlapping area for that view.
Now remember that views can be in a view hierarchy.
They can have a list of subviews.
And the drawRect method for any of those views could have
an arbitrary, have arbitrary performance characteristics.
We don't know how long every view takes to draw.
Ideally, they all draw very quickly.
But even at that it's expensive to have
to redraw all of the overlapping areas,
all of the overlapping views here every time one
were to change its content or position or ordering.
Well with Mac OS X Leopard, with 10.5, we
got a technology called Core Animation,
which allowed us to add layer backed views.
Layer backed views are just NS views that have
had their set once layer properties set to yes.
That's all a layer backed view is.
Core Animation and Cocoa has been able to add layer
backed views, NS views that have set one layer set to yes.
The difference this makes is, instead of
drawing into one shared window buffer now,
all of our views get their own little layer
backed view, layer backed buffer to draw into.
This is powerful, because once a view has drawn
into their layer backed buffer storage area,
if their contents don't change,
then they don't need to redraw.
Draw once and that's it.
This is great for static images, static content.
You just draw once into this buffer,
and all of the positioning and layering
that happens later is performed by the very fast GPU.
[ silence ]
>> Ron: Again, this is all made
possible with Core Animation.
Along with Core Animation we got a few classes, CA
Layer, which is the layer in layer backed views.
And Core Animation, CA Animations,
these are objects that represent the,
the animations that we want to use in our applications.
They're, they're containers for
specifications of how to animate our views.
And something that's subtle, but is still good to know
about, is the protocol, NS Animateable Property Container.
This is a protocol for all objects that have an animator
proxy, and NSView happens to be one of those objects.
So what we can do with a layer backed view, instead of
telling a view to move by setting its frame, frame origin,
or to resize by setting its frame bounds, its bounds,
we can tell the view animator to do the same thing.
We access the view animator as, as we
have here just by doing view animator,
and pretend that the animator is the view itself.
For all intents and purposes, as far as resizing,
rotating, repositioning, setting the opacity,
we can treat the view animator as if it's the view itself.
This is great, because all of our NSViews, all of our
NSControls, our custom controls, our basic Cocoa controls,
everything that's in NSView has an animator.
So now repositioning them, fading
them in and out, resizing them,
we can animate all those properties
just by messaging the view animator.
And we can put them together, changing the
frame, changing the opacity at the same time.
And it's really hard to talk about this sort of stuff.
I'd like to jump to the demo.
Let's see, go close the older model of this app.
Here's, again, this is the same
version that I demoed just a bit ago.
I wanted to show one thing, so if you didn't
notice the little I before, there it is.
If we were to get info for the object, for
this photo, we have this nice flip animation.
The cool done button that Joar had
drawn earlier, we have those as well.
So one thing we've also added the clean up
action, so we can get this nice motion effect.
All we did is calculate where we wanted to
move the photos to, and instead of doing view,
set frame, we do view animator set frame.
And they animate there to their locations and sizes.
One thing you might notice if we were to
switch between projects, you guys see that?
There's a subtle transition.
They don't just pop in and out, there's a very subtle
like short fade in and out when we switched projects.
Now that's, that's an animation
that's happening for us automatically.
We, the timing for it is automatic; we don't
have to set any parameters or anything.
We get this subtle animation for free just by
telling a view animator remove from superview,
and then adding new views by doing
view animator, add subview.
We, we don't have to change anything else in
our code to get this nice subtle animation.
I do want to add one thing though, I...
[ silence ]
>> Ron: If we go back to our project.
>> Ron: So here's the method that currently switches between
the old photos and the new photos when we switch projects.
We're told to switch to showing these photo items.
Right now all it does is this, and it's a basic swap
out the old ones, pop in the new views, that's it.
I'm going to delete this right now, and swap
in this implementation I have precanned.
To walk you through it this is the, a CA Animation.
This is a subclass of CA Animation, CA Basic Animation.
What it defines is a property; it's associated
with a property of an object that's changing.
So in our case the frame origin or its frame size.
And we can set the duration that we
want for the animation if we don't,
don't want to use the default animation settings.
We can adjust the timing function, there are a couple of
prebuilt ones, ease in, ease out, linear, ease in and out.
We can even substitute our own
fancy one with more stop points.
And we can set ourselves as the delegates of an animation.
So that when the animation is done
we can go back and do some clean up.
Now we do some work here figuring out where the old views
are, and we do, we make a little, we do a little trick here
where we add an overlay view where the photos are
currently, and pop those photos into the overlay.
And that's invisible.
So we have an old overlay for all the old photos.
And we create a new overlay for all the new
photos, and position that overlay off screen.
So now we have two views holding a bunch of photos, one
view for the old photos and one view for the new photos.
With this simple trick after setting
up the overlays we can go ahead
and set the animation for both overlays to be the same.
And the animation is simply a transition
moving downwards or upwards.
It's a frame move.
And when we, when we change the frame for both of the
overlays we make sure to message the overlays animator.
And that's the only difference.
Instead of setting the frame on the overlay
themselves we, we change the frame for the animator.
And what our delegate callback gets is
the animation itself that just finished.
So when the animation is done our delegate, which is our
cells in this case, will be told that the animation is done.
And we can pick information out of the animation itself.
We can, we can use it as a generic key value
coding bucket, so we can put information into it
at the time that we create the animation.
So that when the animation is done our delegate callback
knows, ah, these are the two overlay views that I have
to fix up, and throw away the old one, and pop the new
photo item out of the new overlay and into the canvas.
It's a pretty simple pattern.
And it's just easier to show you
what, what you get from this.
So for those maybe like 20 lines of code we get
this nice up and down transition that gives you the,
the impression that you're on an infinite canvas.
Right? Still adding photos, we still get our live previews.
And, actually one neat thing we can do, if
I hold down the Shift key we can slip these
and we can still switch as it's animating.
It's actually kind of fun to do.
I forgot to hold down the Shift key.
So just an example of some of the things that you
can do with CA Animation and Layer Backed Views.
Oh, one other thing I forgot to mention, now with Layer
Backed Views, the whole point of not having to draw
into that, that buffer every time some content changes
or the position changes, that means
that we can draw really fast.
When we don't have to redraw all of the
overlapping views, we can draw really fast.
That's one of the great advantages of
Core Animation and Layer Backed Views.
And to, to show you that I have a simple application
that has two image views overlapping each other,
one that's a big tic tac toe board, and one
that's a simple tic tac toe little piece.
And all I do is I move the frame of
the tic tac toe piece up and down.
Now you can still message the animator of these views
without turning on layer backing for those views.
It's important to note, you don't have to have the
views set to wants layer yes, but it certainly helps.
I'll show you why.
So if we, you'll notice that there's this yellow
flashing whenever I kind of switch between apps here.
Well that's because in our project I've turned on this
argument, added this argument, NS show all drawing, yes.
Feel free to write this one down.
This is a great debugging tool when you're
implementing custom drawings to make sure
that you're not being called to
draw your views contents too often.
This is great even if you're not implementing your own
custom controls, just using some standard controls,
making sure you're not dirtying areas of the view too often.
So with that on we see this flashing
every time our views have to redraw.
Now I'm going to go ahead and hit the go button,
and you'll see the animation of our piece.
So that's a lot of drawing just for
moving the view 120 pixels, right?
Now if we turn on wants layer for all of these,
we turned it on for our background image,
as well as the foreground image view with the X piece in it.
We hit reverse; it's a big difference.
This is what a layer backed view
is supposed to, performed like.
So this is a reason for you to consider using layer
backed views in your custom controls in your applications.
With that, let's go back to slides really briefly.
For more information please contact
Developer Tools Evangelist Michael Jurewitz.
Hey Michael!
Lots of documentation for all the
stuff we've touched on so far
for the Cocoa drawing, the basics
of drawing with Cocoa API's.
The View Programming Guide is a great source of information.
The Human Interface Guidelines,
which we talked about earlier.